The first annual Tottos Memorial open netball tournament was held in Makhanda on 24 February to commemorate netball stalwart, Gary du Plessis. The chairperson of the Makana Netball Association, Sanel Sobahle said the tournament would allow the league to get a sense of how many how many netball clubs are available in Makana for the league. The top two teams of the Makana league would then go on to play in the district championships, said Sobahle. Gary du Plessis was born and bred in Grahamstown, and was popularly known as Tottos. He died in December 2022. In 2004, he became one of the first male netball players for the Rhodes netball team. The Rhodes male team went on to produce a number of official players.  Tottos stopped playing competitively some time before his death owing to an injury but he still contributed by couching and training young and talented males.  Netball coach Yoliswa Plaatjie said “he was very unique and he always made himself available for every match”.  She further described him as a passionate lover of netball and a role model for many male netball players. They often referred to him as “oupa” which is a term of endearment in Afrikaans for grandfather. Belinda Botha, treasurer of the Makana Netball Association paid tribute to the tournament’s sponsors – Rhodes University, Buco, who sponsored the water, gas, and the braai and Legends Cash and Carry who sponsored the cool drinks. All funds generated from food sold at the tournament would be used to fund the Makana Netball Association, Botha said. The tournament had three categories: senior ladies, under 19 girls and the men’s club. The netball clubs who participated were Rhodes A, Jacaranda Aces, Seven Stars, Fort England Hospital, Rhodes C, Juventus, Jacaranda Aces under 19’s, Ocean Nets, Vukani, Rhodes Falcons, snd  Flaming Stars. Students were able to enter the tournament without paying a fee, but to join the league, they will need to pay R300 per team. Rhodes A came first in the senior ladies category, Juventus won first place in the girls’ under 19s and Rhodes Falcons won first place in the men’s category.