Gender-based violence (GBV) refers to any harm or violence perpetrated against a person because of their gender. This violence occurs against a person’s will, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether in public or private. This violence negatively impacts the person’s physical and psychological health. GBV has its roots in gendered power inequities and culture and norms that exploit distinctions between males and females. An imbalance of power exists between males and females, which tends to favour males. This, in turn, creates opportunities for violence against women to occur. Men and boys are also victims of GBV, which should not be overlooked. However, the number of such cases is much smaller than violence against women.   GBV functions to humiliate and make disempowered individuals or groups of people feel inferior and subordinate. This violence is both a human rights and public health issue that affects individuals and impacts families, and communities in the short and long term. In sum, GBV is violence against a person because of their actual or perceived sex, gender, sexual orientation and gender identity. GBV is extremely complex and manifests in many forms, including physical, psychosocial and sexual abuse. Because of the multifaceted nature of GBV, it is not unusual for a person to experience different types of GBV concurrently. Sadly, GBV in its various forms has become so commonplace in South African society that most readers should be able to quickly identify instances of GBV that they have witnessed or become aware of. GBV occurs in different ways, including: (Source: Adapted from Gender Matters – Manual on addressing gender-based violence affecting young people) Gender-based violence, in its more subtle and insidious forms, can take place in seemingly harmless but damaging ways. Consider how verbal and psychological abuse could unfold from these everyday scenarios: Although communities have made strides in developing an understanding of GBV and its effects on individuals and families, not much action has been taken towards eradicating GBV. It is the responsibility of all of us to be aware that any gendered unconscious attitudes we hold do not manifest in conduct that is harmful to others, whatever form this harm may take. Masimbulele Buso is Manager: Harassment, discrimination and gender harm at Rhodes University and Jonathan Campbell is director of the Rhodes University Law Clinic.